*[AES]: Advanced Encryption Standard. A very secure block-cipher that can provide authenticated encryption when combined with the GCM mode of operation.
*[Rijndael]: This is the original name of the algorithm that then became AES - the Advanced Encryption Standard, which is provides state of the art secure encryption.
*[AE]: Authenticated Encryption. This describes ciphers that, in addition to confidentiallity, also provide authenticity of the data. This means that you can be sure that the sender of data encrypted using an AE cipher is guaranteed to be genuine. AE is often added to "normal" ciphers by using an appropriate mode of operation. For example, AES is an AE cipher if you use it with the GCM mode.
*[AEAD]: Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data. This describes ciphers that, in addition to confidentiallity, also provide authenticity of the data. This means that you can be sure that the sender of data encrypted using an AEAD cipher is guaranteed to be genuine. AEAD is often added to "normal" ciphers by using an appropriate mode of operation. AEAD also allows sending plaintext "associated data" along the ciphertext that can be used by the recipient for additional operations - e.g. to look up the sender's secret key in a database based on an identifier sent with the associated data. For example, AES is an AEAD cipher if you use it with the GCM mode.
*[Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data]: "AEAD" for short. This describes ciphers that, in addition to confidentiallity, also provide authenticity of the data. This means that you can be sure that the sender of data encrypted using an AEAD cipher is guaranteed to be genuine. AEAD is often added to "normal" ciphers by using an appropriate mode of operation. For example, AES is an AEAD cipher if you use it with the GCM mode.
*[Block Cipher]: A block cipher is an encryption algorithm that can encrypt exactly one size of data, e.g. 128 Bits. Block ciphers can be used to encrypt arbitrary length of data when they are combined with a "mode of operation". In contrast, Stream Ciphers can directly encrypt arbitrary length of data, even in transit, but are less secure than Block Ciphers.
*[Stream Cipher]: In contrast to a Block Cipher, Stream Ciphers can encrypt arbitrary lengths of data, even in transit. However, they are less secure than Block Ciphers and Block Ciphers can be used together with "modes of operation" to encrpt arbitrary lengths of data, too.
*[symmetric]: Symmetric cryptographic algorithms are mainly used for data encryption. You encrypt a "plaintext" into "ciphertext" using a shared "private key". The disadvantage of this is that the "private key" has to be known by the sender and the receiver and therefore has to be transmitted over a separate, secure channel. There are also asymmetric cryptographic algorithms that allow encryption with a "public key" and digital signatures which do not require the sender/receiver to share the same "private key".
*[Symmetric]: Symmetric cryptographic algorithms are mainly used for data encryption. You encrypt a "plaintext" into "ciphertext" using a shared "private key". The disadvantage of this is that the "private key" has to be known by the sender and the receiver and therefore has to be transmitted over a separate, secure channel. There are also asymmetric cryptographic algorithms that allow encryption with a "public key" and digital signatures which do not require the sender/receiver to share the same "private key".
*[asymmetric]: Asymmetric cryptographic algorithms can be used for encryption and digital signatures. You can encrypt a "plaintext" into "ciphertext" using a "public key" - which can usually be known by anyone - and decrypt it using the "private key". You can also encrypt with the private key and decrypt with the public key. Additionally, you can digitally "sign" a payload using a "private key" and everyone with the corresponding "public key" can verify that the payload was created by the legitimate sender.
*[Asymmetric]: Asymmetric cryptographic algorithms can be used for encryption and digital signatures. You can encrypt a "plaintext" into "ciphertext" using a "public key" - which can usually be known by anyone - and decrypt it using the "private key". You can also encrypt with the private key and decrypt with the public key. Additionally, you can digitally "sign" a payload using a "private key" and everyone with the corresponding "public key" can verify that the payload was created by the legitimate sender.
*[mode of operation]: In practice, "raw" encryption algorithms such as AES are always used in a "mode of operation", because AES in itself only described how to encrypt/decrypt exactly one block, such as 128 Bit (16 Bytes). The "mode of operation" adds support for arbitrary lengths of data, and some modes even add authentication, which makes the cipher an "AEAD" cipher.
*[modes of operation]: In practice, "raw" encryption algorithms such as AES are always used in a "mode of operation", because AES in itself only described how to encrypt/decrypt exactly one block, such as 128 Bit (16 Bytes). The "mode of operation" adds support for arbitrary lengths of data, and some modes even add authentication, which makes the cipher an "AEAD" cipher.
*[key]: A "key" in cryptography can mean different things. Usually, it means the "private key" that is used in symmetric and asymmetric algorithms. In symmetric encryption algorithms (also known as private key algorithms), this same key is used to encrypt and decrypt the "ciphertext" back into "plaintext", which is why it is sometimes only called "key" and not "private key". In asymmetric algorithms (also known as public key algorithms) it is either used to sign a payload or decrypt ciphertext back into plaintext.
*[Key]: A "key" in cryptography can mean different things. Usually, it means the "private key" that is used in symmetric and asymmetric algorithms. In symmetric encryption algorithms (also known as private key algorithms), this same key is used to encrypt and decrypt the "ciphertext" back into "plaintext", which is why it is sometimes only called "key" and not "private key". In asymmetric algorithms (also known as public key algorithms) it is either used to sign a payload or decrypt ciphertext back into plaintext.
*[private key]: The private key is a secret sequence of bytes that is used for encryption. Private keys must only be used by the authorized person/system and must not be known to others. Public keys, in contrast, are free to share widely.
*[public key]: The public key is used in asymmetric encryption and signature algorithms. A public key is mathematically intertwined with exactly one private key. The public key can be shared widely and can be used to validate that data was created by whoever knows the corresponding private key.
*[plaintext]: In cryptography, the "plaintext" is the unencrypted data. This does not have to be actual text, it can be arbitrary bytes in non-readable formats such as MP3, PNG or similar. When plaintext is being encrypted, the encrypted result is called "ciphertext".
*[Plaintext]: In cryptography, the "plaintext" is the unencrypted data. This does not have to be actual text, it can be arbitrary bytes in non-readable formats such as MP3, PNG or similar. When plaintext is being encrypted, the encrypted result is called "ciphertext".
*[ciphertext]: In cryptography, the "ciphertext" is encrypted data. Ciphertext has been created by convertin "plaintext" via an encryption algorithm. Ciphertext can only be converted to "plaintext" if you have the appropriate key.
*[Ciphertext]: In cryptography, the "ciphertext" is encrypted data. Ciphertext has been created by convertin "plaintext" via an encryption algorithm. Ciphertext can only be converted to "plaintext" if you have the appropriate key.
*[salt]: A salt is used in hashing. A salt is added to the data that is about to be hashed so that when the same data is hashed for different purposes, it does not result in the same hash. This prevents attacks such as the "rainbow attack" - e.g. when you use the same password on different sites (or even on the same site for different elements), a leak of your password's hash on one site does not easily compromise the password on the other sites, because the hash will be different, although the password might be the same. Notice that re-using the same password multiple times is highly discourage. It's still done in practice by many users, though.
*[CSPRNG]: Cryptographically Secure Pseudo Random Number Generator. As the name suggests, this describes a pseudo random number generator that can be used for certain cryptographic operations that require pseudo random numbers that are indistuingishable from true randomness.
*[CCA]: Chosen Ciphertext Attack. An attack strategy that allows recovery of the secret key if the attacker is allowed to provide ciphertexts to be decrypted. CCA-vulnerability is often an attribute of the selected mode of operation of a cipher. Generally, authenticated encryption (such as AES-GCM) protects against CCAs, because the plaintext is being verified during decryption and discarded if it was altered.
*[security level]: The security level is the number of bits that an algorithm's key space can be reduced to, e.g. with the help of known attacks. The security level of an algorithm can change with time as new attacks have been found. A security level of 80 Bits is considered pretty secure. The BSI (German Institute of Cybersecurity) recommends a security level of 100 Bits.
*[DH]: Diffie-Hellman is a key exchange algorithm that can be used by two parties to agree on a shared secret key over an unsecure medium. With the help of some mathematical tricks, the data that is transferred via the unsecure medium will not allow an attacker (e.g. Man-in-the-Middle) to also learn the secret key.
*[ECDH]: Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman is a key exchange algorithm based on the Diffie-Hellman algorithm, but using Elliptic Curve mathematics instead. The parties securely agree upon a secret Elliptic Curve private key over an unsecure medium.
*[MAC]: A Message Authenticate Code can be used to guarantee that a message was sent by the designated sender, which must know some form of secret in addition to the message to construct the MAC. The recipient must know this secret, too, to validate that the MAC is valid for the given message. There are a multitude of different kinds of MAC algorithms and an entire chapter dedicated on this sites to MACs.
*[padding oracle attack]: The padding oracle attack relies on modes of operation mainly for symmetric encryption algorithms that use deterministic padding. The attack can be used when a receiver (decrypter, e.g. a server) leaks information about whether the padding of a message is correct or not. This can then allow to encrypt or decrypt data without knowing the private key.
*[digest]: A digest is the result of hashing a message (or arbitrary data for that matter). E.g. when applying a SHA256 hash function on a message, the result is called a "digest". Digests are also called "hashes" or "hash values".
*[HSM]: Hardware Security Module. These modules assist in performing cryptography-related tasks such as key storage, encryption or crypto-secure random number generation.
*[nonce]: Nonce stands for "Number only used once" and is often used in ciphers in order for the same plaintext not to encrypt to the same ciphertext. It is of extrem importance that a nonce may never be used twice with the same Private Key (hence the name), because this will allow an attacker to extract plaintexts from only ciphertexts.